GWEN IFILL: But, first, in
issuing guidelines
for how we should eat for the
first time in
five years, the federal
government revises
some of its longstanding advice.
Hari Sreenivasan has that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Despite all
the warnings
over the years, you may be
surprised that,
for the first time, the
government put a limit
on added sugar, saying it should
comprise
no more than 10 percent of your
daily calories.
The guidelines also dropped
prior advice about
limiting or avoiding cholesterol
and eggs.
The government warned about
eating too much
protein or red meat, but stopped
short of
what some experts wanted. And it
said moderate
drinking of alcohol or coffee is
OK.
To help guide us through some of
these guidelines,
their impact and the
controversy, I'm joined
by Allison Aubrey, food and
health correspondent
for NPR.
So, Allison, let's start with
sugar first.
ALLISON AUBREY, NPR: Sure.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What is the
right amount
of sugar? And put it in terms I
can understand.
ALLISON AUBREY: Sure.
Well, basically, the dietary
guidelines are
coming out and saying you should
get no more
than 10 percent of your calories
per day from
sugar, and that translates to
about 10 to
12-teaspoons per day. Now, keep
in mind, this
adds up really, really quickly.
It translates
to about maybe 40 grams of
sugar. That's the
unit of measurement that people
are used to
seeing on labels.
So, for instance, this morning,
I had a yogurt
for breakfast that had about 20
grams of sugar.
You had one sort of sugary drink
or one muffin,
you're at your daily limit. And
basically,
right now, Americans are eating
about twice
as much. We have reported on
studies that
show that many Americans are
eating 22 teaspoons
a day.
So if people are going to start
following
these recommendations, it really
means cutting
consumption of sugar in half.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
maybe that will
help keep my New Year's
resolution going.
So, let's also talk about the
change, it seems,
about eggs and cholesterol. Why
the change?
ALLISON AUBREY: Well, it's been
sort of evolving
nutrition science, I would say.
There used to be a belief that
if you were
to eat a lot of cholesterol-rich
foods, so
animal-based foods with
cholesterol, think
of eggs or shrimp, that that
high cholesterol
would lead to high LDL
cholesterol in your
bloodstream.
So there is still clearly a
concern about
elevated cholesterol in
bloodstream. That's
why many, many Americans are on
statins. But
it's now recognized that
high-cholesterol
foods don't necessarily
translate into higher
cholesterol in our blood.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So the
guidelines didn't
say eat less red meat. It said
go ahead and
supplement with more seafood and
other things.
Why?
ALLISON AUBREY: Well, I think
what the goal
is that one of the committee
members told
me that Americans don't want to
be told what
not to eat, what to avoid. They
want to be
told what they -- how to expand
their diet
or add more variety.
And so the words of the dietary
guidelines
and the people supporting
communication about
the new guidelines, the word
they're using
is shift. The idea is to shift
away from meat
and try alternative sources of
protein, so
anything from seafood to nuts to
beans.
And, implicitly, that might mean
eating less
red meat, if you're eating more
of these other
sources of protein. It's a
little bit controversial.
The committee that helped advise
the administration
on what should be in these
guidelines came
out last year and said, hey, we
think you
should tell Americans to eat
less red meat.
But, in the end, that's not
what's in their
dietary guidelines.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And what are
nutritionists
or experts in this think as
well?
ALLISON AUBREY: Well, there is
some criticism,
I have to say, today.
I have spoken to several top
nutrition researchers
who say a limit on red meat
really should
have been put into the
guidelines. Otherwise,
Americans might just be confused
by this message
about shifting. And I think the
range of opinion
goes something like this.
Some people say, well, if you
are nudging
Americans to eat a little bit
less, that's
enough. The other point of view
is Americans
need to be told like, hey, there
is too much
red meat in your diet. They need
a specific
limit, but, again, that's not
there.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The fact that
these guidelines
come out only once every five
years, it almost
makes it a political document.
It's a statement
by an administration on what
they think the
government thinks people should
or shouldn't
eat, right?
ALLISON AUBREY: Well, I don't
see it so much
as a political document, as I
see it as kind
of a consensus report.
There is a lag factor here. You
pointed out
in the beginning that just now
do we have
a recommendation to limit sugar.
Your grandmother
could have told you that too
much sugar is
bad for you. And what you have
to understand
is that the way this process
works is that,
every five years, the Department
of Health
and Human Services and the U.S.
Department
of Agriculture assign this
expert committee
to review all the new evidence.
They pore over all of the
nutrition science
and they try to come up with a
consensus.
So, for instance, five years
ago, we knew
that sugar would rot your teeth,
but we didn't
know that 22 teaspoons of sugar
a day would
lead to an increased risk of
heart disease
or diabetes.
And so it takes a while for a
body of evidence
to lead scientists to say, aha,
we need a
clear recommendation here, so a
bit of a lag
time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Allison Aubrey
of NPR, thanks so much for
joining us.
ALLISON AUBREY: Thanks for
having me.